
# xLLiM

`xLLiM` is a C++ with Python bindings implementation of Gaussian Locally-Linear Mapping.
It can be used to perform efficient inversion of high-dimensional models. 
`xLLiM` integrates features such as:
* Forward model functionnals. These can be implemented as C++ or as pure Python functions. The forward model can be used to generate data following a distribution and refine GLLiM results by sampling the PDF using various strategies.
* Multi-initialization options
* Post-GLLiM refinement methods such as Importance Sampling (IS) and Iterative Mixture Importance Sampling (IMIS)
* Post-processing analysis, including confidence quantification on predictions, detection of multiple solutions, and permutation of predictions in case of signal regularity.
Currently, `xLLiM` supports only Gaussion probability distributions, but other distributions may be added to it in the future.

`xLLiM` is distributed as a compiled shared library available and can be installed via conda, pip, or as a Docker container. It is integrated in the [Planet-GLLiM](https://gitlab.inria.fr/xllim/planet-gllim) 
astrophysics application, that is distributed as a Docker image for local use and as a data processing service
on [Allgo-18](https://allgo18.inria.fr/).

The `xLLiM` method was previously implemented in `R` and is available on [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/xLLiM/index.html)
An experimental implementation in `Julia` exists as well.

This `xLLiM` implementation is derived from [Kernelo](https://gitlab.inria.fr/kernelo-mistis/kernelo-gllim-is).
`Kernelo` is obsolete and is no longer maintained.

# Documentation and API reference

The API reference of the xLLiM module is available at [xLLiM API reference](https://xllim-tools.github.io/xllim/). 
For more information you can find a complete scientific documentation in the [Planet-GLLiM documentation](https://xllim.gitlabpages.inria.fr/planet-gllim/)

# Runtime Dependencies

## Mandatory
These packages are required for the core functionality of the library.
| Name                 | version           |
|----------------------|-------------------|
| Python               | >=3.10, <3.13     |
| Numpy                | >=2.0, <3         |
| h5py                 | >=3.8, <4         |

## Optional: ENVI / GDAL Support
xllim requires GDAL specifically for ENVI hyperspectral file support. Because GDAL depends on native system libraries, installation can be complex.

### Recommended (Most reliable)
Using Conda is the simplest way to handle linked C libraries:
```
conda install gdal
```

## Alternative: pip + system package (Advanced users)
If installing via apt or brew, the Python GDAL version must match the system GDAL version.
If the versions do not match, the installation will fail.

Example on Ubuntu:

1. Install system libraries
```
sudo apt install libgdal-dev gdal-bin
```
2. Check the system version
```
gdal-config --version
```
3. Install the matching python wrapper (e.g., if version is 3.8.4)
```
pip install "gdal==3.8.4"
```

# How to run xLLiM ?

`xLLiM` can be installed and used in several ways, depending on your environment and preference.

## 1. Conda-forge (recommanded)
The simplest way to install `xLLiM` is via conda
@Todo

## 2. PyPI

```bash
pip install xLLiM
```
The official wheels are compatible with Linux x86_64 (manylinux_2_28), Python 3.11 and 3.12 only.

## 3. Docker

A minimal Docker image is available based on python:3.11-slim, which already includes xLLiM installed via the wheel generated by our CI pipeline:

### Prerequisite
Docker Engine is available on a variety of Linux platforms, macOS and Windows 10. You can find the installation documentation on [Docker's documentation website](https://docs.docker.com/)
#### Linux & MacOs
* [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/) ([Installation instructions](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/))
* [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) ([Installation instructions](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/))

#### Windows
* Docker Desktop that contains everything to run a Docker Compose ([Installation instructions](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/windows/install/)). You will be asked to install a linux kernel on the first Docker Desktop run. Choose Ubuntu-20.04. [Instructions to install the linux kernel](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install)

### Using the Docker image

Pull the image:

```bash
docker pull <docker-image-name>
```

Run your project by mounting your source directory:

```bash
docker run -it \
  -v $(pwd):/workspace \
  -w /workspace \
  <docker-image-name> \
  python main.py
```
This allows you to use `xLLiM` without manually managing dependencies or Python environments.

You can also open an interactive shell:

```bash
docker run -it -v $(pwd):/workspace -w /workspace <docker-image-name> bash
```

### The Jupyter notebook image

The image is built from the offical [jupyter/scipy-notebook](https://jupyter-docker-stacks.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) image adapted to xLLiM dependencies. This image offers the familiar JupyterLab user interface within a Python-based datascience environment.

### First steps

1. Connect to Inria's GitLab
```
docker login registry.gitlab.inria.fr
```
2. Get the Dockerfile. You achieve this by using curl or wget.
```
curl --location -o jupyter.Dockerfile "https://gitlab.inria.fr/xllim/xllim/-/raw/master/jupyter.Dockerfile?ref_type=heads&inline=false"
```
3. Build the docker image named *xllim_jupyter_notebook*
```
docker build -f jupyter.Dockerfile -t "xllim_jupyter_notebook" --no-cache-filter install .
```
4. Create and run the container *xllim_notebook* and bind the volume to your current working directory.
```
docker run -it --name xllim_notebook -p 8888:8888 -v "${PWD}":/home/jovyan/work xllim_jupyter_notebook
```
5. You can find the JupyterLab server adress (*http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=[some-token]*) in the logs. Make sure there is not another Jupyter server running. Use Control-C to stop this server and shut down all kernels (twice to skip confirmation).
Have fun !

### Use your container

Once your container is set up it is very easy to use your xLLiM environment. All changes made to the docker container (installing packages, etc.) are **persistent**. Be careful not to delete your container, otherwise all modifications made within it would be lost. You can start and stop the container with the two simple commands below:
```
docker stop xllim_notebook
docker start xllim_notebook
```
### ⚠️ File permission issues

Depending on your OS and Docker version you may face permission issues on the mounted volume (/home/jovyan/work/ directory).
You can overcome this issue by granting file access to the virtual user (*jovyan*) when creating the container.
```
docker run -it --name xllim_notebook -p 8888:8888 -v "${PWD}":/home/jovyan/work xllim_jupyter_notebook bash -c "chown -R jovyan:users /home/jovyan/work && start-notebook.py"
```
After stopping the Docker container you should need to grant back file access to your host machine's user.
```
sudo chown -R $(id -u):$(id -g) "${PWD}"
```

# Manual installation (optional)
If you are setting up the environment manually, please refer to the requirements below.

## Build Dependencies

These are required only if you are compiling the library from source.
| Name                 | version           |
|----------------------|-------------------|
| g++                  | 11.4.0            |
| Armadillo            | >=12.6,<13        |
| Python               | >=3.10, <3.13     |
| Pybind11             | 2.13.6            |
| Carma                | 0.8.0             |
| Boost                | 1.78              |
| OpenBLAS             | >=0.3.15, <1      |

## Run on Ubuntu 22.04

`xLLiM` is built on Ubuntu 22.04, so if it your OS you can run it without Docker. It may also work with other Linux distribution but it is not tested.

1. Get the xLLiM extension 
The extension .so file is then stored as artifact, and can be downloaded from [GitLab's CI page](https://gitlab.inria.fr/xllim/xllim/-/pipelines). Click on the menu on the right side of the latest succesful job and select `compile-and-test-xllim:archive`. This will download an `archive.zip` file containing the extension `.so` file.

2. Install dependecies
```
sudo apt install python3 python3-numpy libarmadillo10 libgomp1
```
3. Copy the .so extension file into your working directory and start Python 3
```
python3
>>> import xllim
```


## Build on Ubuntu 22.04

If you want to build the projet.

1. Clone the projet.
```
git clone https://gitlab.inria.fr/xllim/xllim.git
cd xllim
```
2. Install xLLiM dependencies

```
sudo apt update

# Install compilation tools
sudo apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends g++ cmake make

# Install Armadillo-related dependencies
sudo apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends libopenblas-dev liblapack-dev libarpack2-dev libsuperlu-dev libarmadillo-dev

# Install Python-related dependencies
sudo apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends python3-dev

# Boost required for boost/property_tree
sudo apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends libboost-dev
```
3. Build with CMake

You have to define target installation directory. It can indicate the path to your Python packages. The Debug build type can be either *Debug* (-O0 -g -fsanitize=address) or *Release* (-O2 -DNDEBUG).
```
cd /path/to/xllim/build
cmake -S .. -B . -DPYTHON_LIBRARY_DIR="/home/user/.local/lib/python3.10/site-packages"  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
make install
```
4. Now you can import xLLiM in Python 3:
```
python3
>>> import xllim
```

# Licence
This software is licensed under the [BSD 3-Clause License](LICENCE.txt).
While the software is free, we would appreciate it if you send us an email at `xllim-contact@inria.fr` to let us know how you use it.
Also, please contact us if the licence does not meet your needs.
